syllabus.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Syllabus
permalink: /syllabus/
---

# STAT 385: Statistics Programming Methods

#### *University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign*

#### *Summer 2016*

# Location and Time

- **Location:** Siebel 1105
- **Time:** Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday, 3:00 PM - 4:50 PM

# Course Websites

* **Materials:** <http://stat385.thecoatlessprofessor.com> (Source: <http://github.com/coatless/stat385>)
* **Discussion Forum:** <https://piazza.com/illinois/summer2016/stat385/home>
* **Analytical Environment:** <https://rstudio.stat.illinois.edu/>

# Course Staff

### Instructor

- **Name:** James Balamuta
- **Email:** balamut2@illinois.edu
- **Office:** 117 Illini Hall
- **Office Hours:** Wednesday and Friday 11:00 AM - 12:30 PM CDT

### Grader

- **Name:** TBA?
- **Email:** TBA?
- **Office:** TBA?
- **Office Hours:** TBA?

# Course Description

The world is rapidly evolving to rely on data driven decisions. These decisions come from the work a statistician or data scientist presents in his or her reports. In order to present an analysis, the analyst needs to be able to leverage computing resources through programming to unearth patterns and models that exist within data sets. As a result, statisticians and data scientists must be savvy to programming methods that are useful to the wide variety of analysis that they will be expected to perform.

For the focus of the course, fundamental programming techniques and considerations will be introduced. Students will learn one of the leading statistical programing languages in depth and will be well positioned to easily learn others based on general principles. With this in mind, the course provides a framework for writing statistical algorithms through the creation of functions and object oriented programming. Students will also create dynamic reports that encapsulate their code.

# Course Objectives

After completing the course, students should be able to:

- Analyze and discuss the meaning behind lines of code;
- Construct implementations of a statistical algorithm within a statistical computing environment;
- Explain fundamental computing theory as it applies within the domain of Statistics;

# Course Content

Tentative subjects include:

- **Paradigms:** R, C++ (using Rcpp), OpenMP, MPI, Bash, git, regex;
- **Reproducible Research:** `knitr`, `rmarkdown`, and `packrat`;
- **Computing Theory:** Control logic, scoping logic, big O, data structures, object-oriented programming;
- **Algorithms:** SLR, MLR, ANOVA, Accept-Reject, Probability Integral Transform;
- **R packages:** Construction of R-packages using `devtools`, `roxygen2`, `profvis`, and `testthat`;
- **Visualizations:** Exploratory Data Analysis with Base R, `ggplot2`, and `rgl` (3D plots).

# Textbooks

Please note that these textbooks are available online. If you would like a paper copy, you are more than welcome to obtain one. I will be referencing the electronic versions.

I will heavily reference the following texts:

- **Required:** [Advanced R Programming](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/) Hadley Wickham
- **Required:** [R for Data Science](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/) Garrett Grolemund and Hadley Wickham
- **Required:** [The R Inferno](http://www.burns-stat.com/pages/Tutor/R_inferno.pdf) Patrick Burns

The following textbooks are *helpful*, but not necessary to succeed in the course:

- **Supplemental:** [Introduction to Scientific Programming and Simulation Using R](http://www.ms.unimelb.edu.au/~odj/Teaching/MAST30025/spuRs_reformatted_part1.pdf) Owen Jones, Robert Maillardet, and Andrew Robinson
- **Supplemental:** [An introduction to R](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/R-intro.pdf) Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat
- **Supplemental:** [The Art of R Programming](http://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_6955421) Norman Matloff
- **Supplemental:** [R Packages](http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz/) Hadley Wickham
- **Supplemental:** [ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis [2nd Edition - GitHub Only]](https://github.com/hadley/ggplot2-book) Hadley Wickham

# Prerequisites

Prior to taking this course, one should have acquired the following knowledge:

* [STAT 200: Statistical Analysis](http://catalog.illinois.edu/courses-of-instruction/stat/)
* Ability to collaborate in a group project
    * Listen, provide *constructive* dialog, contribute work
* Motivation

**Note:** If you have taken a higher-level course, e.g. STAT 400 or STAT 425, this satisfies the STAT 200 requirement.

# Email Policy

All course emails must contain in the subject line `[STAT 385]` and should be sent from an `@illinois.edu` email address. Failure to adhere to this policy will either result in:

1. An automated message as a reminder of this policy; 
2. **The email is ignored.**

# Bug Bounty Program

> "To err is human, but to really foul things up you need a computer." 
>
> --- **Paul R. Ehrlich**

James is a *human*. As a result, he will sometimes introduce *bugs* as he types into a computer. Though, he will try his very best to minimize the amount of *bugs* in the course material.  If he does create a *bug*, please let him know. Depending on the severity, you will be compensated with:

* Severe: Unintentionally, part of the code is fundamentally flawed.
    * Fix and/or patch is *required*.
    * **Reward:** Bug Hall of Fame and 1 E.C. point
* Medium: Logical flaws that occur during class.
    * Must explain the flaw and a potential solution
    * **Reward:** Large candy bar of your choice
* Trivial: Typos and Grammar
    * Minor nuisances that if corrected via a pull request will be appreciated. 
    * **Reward:** For every 20 typos and grammar bits a large candy bar of your choice

As an added plus, there are many good discussions that come about due to mistakes...

# Attendence

You are expected to attend all lectures. Failure to do so will have a direct effect on your course grade due to **three** class participation points being deducated on each absence. Please note, every student is eligible to miss *two* class periods without needing to provide a reason. Any known or potential extracurricular conflicts should be discussed in person with the instructor during the first week of classes, or as soon as they arise. Please be proactive.

# Homework

There will be **eight** homework assignments, each worth **25** points. None of the homeworks will be dropped. Instead, you will have **two** late due date **extensions** that will extend the original due date by *24 hours*.

# Exam

There is **one** midterm exam that is worth **125** points, which accounts for **25** % of the overall course grade. The midterm will have an in-class portion as well as a take-home portion that will be due within 24-48 hours after the start of the exam. The take-home portion of the exam may not be discussed with your classmates.

# Group Project

During the semester, students are expected to work on a capstone project within a group. The capstone project is meant to either showcase a newly implemented statistical algorithms OR extend existing functions in other packages. The group size should be no more than 3 students. There are four different phases of the group project: **Proposal**, **Progress Update**, **Project Presentation**, and **Final Project Report**. Each phases is worth **37.5** points making the overall project grade **150** points. At the end, students will be asked to perform peer evaluations of group members that may influence the grades of students who do not contribute equally to the group project. As a results, students should view project grades as being tentative.

## Proposal

The project proposal should be at least 3 pages long but less than 5 pages. Within the group project proposal, students should answer the following questions:

1.	**Problem / Topic:** 
    * What problem or topic are you addressing? 
    * Why is it interesting or important?
    * What evidence supports this conclusion? 
2.	**Idea:** 
    * What is your idea for addressing the problem or topic? 
    * Why is it original relative to prior work? 
    * Where did the idea come from?
3.	**Relevance:**
    * How does your idea match with the course’s focus on statistical programming? 
4.	**Method:** 
    * What is your general plan for realizing the idea? 
5.	**Feasibility:** 
    * Is this project able to be completed before the end of the semester?
    * What steps must occur to complete the project before the end of the semester?
6.	**Time Schedule and Work Division:** 
    * What is the work plan to accomplish the necessary tasks before the end of the semester?
7.	**Preliminary Work:** 
    * What have you done or learned anything so far for the project? 
8.	**References:** 
    * Provide a list of papers or items you have read to write this proposal. 

## Progress Report

The project progress report should describe the present status of the project. Specifically, please address:

1. How is the project progressing?
2. What has been accomplished thus far?
3. What have you learned? 
4. What issues have arisen?

Please **avoid** including code snippets. However, clear functional output is okay.

The score for the progress report is based on how much work has been completed since the project proposal was initially submitted.

## Presentations

There will be 15 minutes during class that is allocated to the presentation of your project.  Please focus on the outcomes of the project. The score is based solely on how well the project outcomes and methods used are conveyed. There should be no more than 12 slides (not including references) in the presentation.

## Final Report

Please prepare the final report using the following outline: 

1.	Introduction
2.	Related Work
3.	Method
4.	Results
5.	Discussion
6.	Conclusion
7.	References

Reports will be graded based upon project outcomes, the execution of methods described, and writing quality.

# Software

The course will use and present the **R** statistical computing language as well as different parts of C++ through [Rcpp](http://gallery.rcpp.org/). You are free to use any language you choose, but the course staff will only be able to provide support for **R**. If you would like to use another statistical computing environment, please alert the instructor ASAP to discuss feasibility.


# Course Grades

| Type             | Points Per     | Total Points |
|------------------|----------------|--------------|
| Participation    | 25             | 25           |
| Homework         | 8 x 25         | 200          |
| Exam             | 125            | 125          |
| Group Project    | 4 x 37.5       | 150          |
| **Course Total** |                | **500**      |


# Grading Scale

| A+  | A   | A-  | B+  | B   | B-  | C+  | C   | C-  | D+  | D   | D-  |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| TBD | 96% | 93% | 90% | 86% | 83% | 80% | 76% | 73% | 70% | 66% | 63% |

Grades are not curved or adjusted. This is not to dishearten students, but to let them know that their grade is based on individual effort and not on comparative effort.




# Academic Integrity

The official University of Illinois policy related to academic integrity can be found in Article 1, Part 4 of the Student Code. [Section 1-402 in particular outlines behavior which is considered an infraction of academic integrity.](http://studentcode.illinois.edu/article1_part4_1-402.html) These sections of the Student Code will be upheld in the STAT 430 classroom. Any violations will be dealt with in a swift, fair and strict manner. 

You may discuss methods for completing the homework assignments with other students, but the execution of these
methods and the preparation of the document must be done independently. Sufficient evidence of sharing results, collaborating on written assignments, or simply relying on internet resources will result in a score of 0 for the assignment and you will lose your right to drop the lowest score. There can be no discussion with other students or collaboration of any kind on the take-home exams.

To ensure that you do not violate the academic integrity policies, all code and solutions should be prepared yourself. All code should be typed yourself, **not** copy and pasted. (Except for code provided in class or in the textbook.)


# Changes

The instructor reserves the right to make any changes he considers academically advisable. Such changes, if any, will be announced in class. Please note that it is your responsibility to attend the class and keep track of the proceedings.

Also, if changes are made... 

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WpE_xMRiCLE" frameborder="0"></iframe>

Commit message:

Removed hourly grader
Updated software description.

syllabus.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Syllabus
permalink: /syllabus/
---

# STAT 385: Statistics Programming Methods

#### *University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign*

#### *Summer 2016*

# Location and Time

- **Location:** Siebel 1105
- **Time:** Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday, 3:00 PM - 4:50 PM

# Course Websites

* **Materials:** <http://stat385.thecoatlessprofessor.com> (Source: <http://github.com/coatless/stat385>)
* **Discussion Forum:** <https://piazza.com/illinois/summer2016/stat385/home>
* **Analytical Environment:** <https://rstudio.stat.illinois.edu/>

# Course Staff

### Instructor

- **Name:** James Balamuta
- **Email:** balamut2@illinois.edu
- **Office:** 117 Illini Hall
- **Office Hours:** Wednesday and Friday 11:00 AM - 12:30 PM CDT

# Course Description

The world is rapidly evolving to rely on data driven decisions. These decisions come from the work a statistician or data scientist presents in his or her reports. In order to present an analysis, the analyst needs to be able to leverage computing resources through programming to unearth patterns and models that exist within data sets. As a result, statisticians and data scientists must be savvy to programming methods that are useful to the wide variety of analysis that they will be expected to perform.

For the focus of the course, fundamental programming techniques and considerations will be introduced. Students will learn one of the leading statistical programing languages in depth and will be well positioned to easily learn others based on general principles. With this in mind, the course provides a framework for writing statistical algorithms through the creation of functions and object oriented programming. Students will also create dynamic reports that encapsulate their code.

# Course Objectives

After completing the course, students should be able to:

- Analyze and discuss the meaning behind lines of code;
- Construct implementations of a statistical algorithm within a statistical computing environment;
- Explain fundamental computing theory as it applies within the domain of Statistics;

# Course Content

Tentative subjects include:

- **Paradigms:** R, C++ (using Rcpp), OpenMP, MPI, Bash, git, regex;
- **Reproducible Research:** `knitr`, `rmarkdown`, and `packrat`;
- **Computing Theory:** Control logic, scoping logic, big O, data structures, object-oriented programming;
- **Algorithms:** SLR, MLR, ANOVA, Accept-Reject, Probability Integral Transform;
- **R packages:** Construction of R-packages using `devtools`, `roxygen2`, `profvis`, and `testthat`;
- **Visualizations:** Exploratory Data Analysis with Base R, `ggplot2`, and `rgl` (3D plots).

# Textbooks

Please note that these textbooks are available online. If you would like a paper copy, you are more than welcome to obtain one. I will be referencing the electronic versions.

I will heavily reference the following texts:

- **Required:** [Advanced R Programming](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/) Hadley Wickham
- **Required:** [R for Data Science](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/) Garrett Grolemund and Hadley Wickham
- **Required:** [The R Inferno](http://www.burns-stat.com/pages/Tutor/R_inferno.pdf) Patrick Burns

The following textbooks are *helpful*, but not necessary to succeed in the course:

- **Supplemental:** [Introduction to Scientific Programming and Simulation Using R](http://www.ms.unimelb.edu.au/~odj/Teaching/MAST30025/spuRs_reformatted_part1.pdf) Owen Jones, Robert Maillardet, and Andrew Robinson
- **Supplemental:** [An introduction to R](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/R-intro.pdf) Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat
- **Supplemental:** [The Art of R Programming](http://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_6955421) Norman Matloff
- **Supplemental:** [R Packages](http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz/) Hadley Wickham
- **Supplemental:** [ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis [2nd Edition - GitHub Only]](https://github.com/hadley/ggplot2-book) Hadley Wickham

# Prerequisites

Prior to taking this course, one should have acquired the following knowledge:

* [STAT 200: Statistical Analysis](http://catalog.illinois.edu/courses-of-instruction/stat/)
* Ability to collaborate in a group project
    * Listen, provide *constructive* dialog, contribute work
* Motivation

**Note:** If you have taken a higher-level course, e.g. STAT 400 or STAT 425, this satisfies the STAT 200 requirement.

# Email Policy

All course emails must contain in the subject line `[STAT 385]` and should be sent from an `@illinois.edu` email address. Failure to adhere to this policy will either result in:

1. An automated message as a reminder of this policy; 
2. **The email is ignored.**

# Bug Bounty Program

> "To err is human, but to really foul things up you need a computer." 
>
> --- **Paul R. Ehrlich**

James is a *human*. As a result, he will sometimes introduce *bugs* as he types into a computer. Though, he will try his very best to minimize the amount of *bugs* in the course material.  If he does create a *bug*, please let him know. Depending on the severity, you will be compensated with:

* Severe: Unintentionally, part of the code is fundamentally flawed.
    * Fix and/or patch is *required*.
    * **Reward:** Bug Hall of Fame and 1 E.C. point
* Medium: Logical flaws that occur during class.
    * Must explain the flaw and a potential solution
    * **Reward:** Large candy bar of your choice
* Trivial: Typos and Grammar
    * Minor nuisances that if corrected via a pull request will be appreciated. 
    * **Reward:** For every 20 typos and grammar bits a large candy bar of your choice

As an added plus, there are many good discussions that come about due to mistakes...

# Attendence

You are expected to attend all lectures. Failure to do so will have a direct effect on your course grade due to **three** class participation points being deducated on each absence. Please note, every student is eligible to miss *two* class periods without needing to provide a reason. Any known or potential extracurricular conflicts should be discussed in person with the instructor during the first week of classes, or as soon as they arise. Please be proactive.

# Homework

There will be **eight** homework assignments, each worth **25** points. None of the homeworks will be dropped. Instead, you will have **two** late due date **extensions** that will extend the original due date by *24 hours*.

# Exam

There is **one** midterm exam that is worth **125** points, which accounts for **25** % of the overall course grade. The midterm will have an in-class portion as well as a take-home portion that will be due within 24-48 hours after the start of the exam. The take-home portion of the exam may not be discussed with your classmates.

# Group Project

During the semester, students are expected to work on a capstone project within a group. The capstone project is meant to either showcase a newly implemented statistical algorithms OR extend existing functions in other packages. The group size should be no more than 3 students. There are four different phases of the group project: **Proposal**, **Progress Update**, **Project Presentation**, and **Final Project Report**. Each phases is worth **37.5** points making the overall project grade **150** points. At the end, students will be asked to perform peer evaluations of group members that may influence the grades of students who do not contribute equally to the group project. As a results, students should view project grades as being tentative.

## Proposal

The project proposal should be at least 3 pages long but less than 5 pages. Within the group project proposal, students should answer the following questions:

1.	**Problem / Topic:** 
    * What problem or topic are you addressing? 
    * Why is it interesting or important?
    * What evidence supports this conclusion? 
2.	**Idea:** 
    * What is your idea for addressing the problem or topic? 
    * Why is it original relative to prior work? 
    * Where did the idea come from?
3.	**Relevance:**
    * How does your idea match with the course’s focus on statistical programming? 
4.	**Method:** 
    * What is your general plan for realizing the idea? 
5.	**Feasibility:** 
    * Is this project able to be completed before the end of the semester?
    * What steps must occur to complete the project before the end of the semester?
6.	**Time Schedule and Work Division:** 
    * What is the work plan to accomplish the necessary tasks before the end of the semester?
7.	**Preliminary Work:** 
    * What have you done or learned anything so far for the project? 
8.	**References:** 
    * Provide a list of papers or items you have read to write this proposal. 

## Progress Report

The project progress report should describe the present status of the project. Specifically, please address:

1. How is the project progressing?
2. What has been accomplished thus far?
3. What have you learned? 
4. What issues have arisen?

Please **avoid** including code snippets. However, clear functional output is okay.

The score for the progress report is based on how much work has been completed since the project proposal was initially submitted.

## Presentations

There will be 15 minutes during class that is allocated to the presentation of your project.  Please focus on the outcomes of the project. The score is based solely on how well the project outcomes and methods used are conveyed. There should be no more than 12 slides (not including references) in the presentation.

## Final Report

Please prepare the final report using the following outline: 

1.	Introduction
2.	Related Work
3.	Method
4.	Results
5.	Discussion
6.	Conclusion
7.	References

Reports will be graded based upon project outcomes, the execution of methods described, and writing quality.

# Software

The course will use and present the **R** statistical computing language as well as different parts of C++ through [Rcpp](http://gallery.rcpp.org/). The integrated developer environment that we will use to explore *R* is [RStudio IDE](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/) made by [RStudio Inc](https://www.rstudio.com). You are free to use any language you choose, but the course staff will only be able to provide support for **R**. If you would like to use another statistical computing environment, please alert the instructor ASAP to discuss feasibility.


# Course Grades

| Type             | Points Per     | Total Points |
|------------------|----------------|--------------|
| Participation    | 25             | 25           |
| Homework         | 8 x 25         | 200          |
| Exam             | 125            | 125          |
| Group Project    | 4 x 37.5       | 150          |
| **Course Total** |                | **500**      |


# Grading Scale

| A+  | A   | A-  | B+  | B   | B-  | C+  | C   | C-  | D+  | D   | D-  |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| TBD | 96% | 93% | 90% | 86% | 83% | 80% | 76% | 73% | 70% | 66% | 63% |

Grades are not curved or adjusted. This is not to dishearten students, but to let them know that their grade is based on individual effort and not on comparative effort.

# Academic Integrity

The official University of Illinois policy related to academic integrity can be found in Article 1, Part 4 of the Student Code. [Section 1-402 in particular outlines behavior which is considered an infraction of academic integrity.](http://studentcode.illinois.edu/article1_part4_1-402.html) These sections of the Student Code will be upheld in the STAT 430 classroom. Any violations will be dealt with in a swift, fair and strict manner. 

You may discuss methods for completing the homework assignments with other students, but the execution of these
methods and the preparation of the document must be done independently. Sufficient evidence of sharing results, collaborating on written assignments, or simply relying on internet resources will result in a score of 0 for the assignment and you will lose your right to drop the lowest score. There can be no discussion with other students or collaboration of any kind on the take-home exams.

To ensure that you do not violate the academic integrity policies, all code and solutions should be prepared yourself. All code should be typed yourself, **not** copy and pasted. (Except for code provided in class or in the textbook.)


# Changes

The instructor reserves the right to make any changes he considers academically advisable. Such changes, if any, will be announced in class. Please note that it is your responsibility to attend the class and keep track of the proceedings.

Also, if changes are made... 

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WpE_xMRiCLE" frameborder="0"></iframe>
