---
title: "Homework 3 - You Should Know"
author: "Summer 2016 - Balamuta"
date: "June 30, 2016"
layout: post
categories: hw
mathjax: true
tags: 
- long data
- wide data
- read data
- s3
- date stamp
- r
---


> "It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data."
> 
> --- Sherlock Holmes, *A Study in Scarlett* by Arthur Conan Doyle

# Directions

While working on homework, students are encouraged to work together in a group. Though, each student must turn in their own homework answers.  If students opt to work together, then it is important that they list the names of the students that they have collaborated with. Please note that sharing, copying or providing any part of a homework solution or code to another student is an infraction of the University’s rules on Academic Integrity. Rest assured, any violation of Academic Integrity will be punished **as severely as possible**.

* Your assignment must be submitted through the e-mail to `balamut2` [at] illinois [dot] edu. You are required to attach two (and only two) files to the *same* e-mail:
    * The RMarkdown (`.Rmd`) file must be saved as `hw3_yourNetID.Rmd`, e.g.  `hw3_balamut2.Rmd`
    * The generated output from the `.Rmd` file is then contained in `hw3_yourNetID.html`, e.g. `hw3_balamut2.html`.
* Under this structure, the content found within the `.html` file will be considered a "report" which is the material that will determine the majority of your grade. Be sure to visibly include all `R` code and output that is relevant to answering the exercises. (You do not need to include irrelevant code you tried that resulted in error or did not answer the question correctly.)
* There are no limitations as to the number of submissions that can be made. However, only the last submission *before* the deadline will be graded by myself or the grader.

# Assignment Overview

## Objectives

1. Handle Reshaping Data
2. Reading Data
3. Modifying a Data Set
4. Extracting Information from Strings
5. Creating Date Stamps
6. Writing S3 Objects

## Grading Criteria


| Exercise | Exceptional | Exceeds Expectations |  Meets Expectations | Improvement Needed  | Unsatisfactory | Total Number of Points |
|----------|-------------|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------|------------------------|
|    0     |  $[0.9,1]$  | $[0.8,0.9)$          | $[0.7,0.8)$         |  $[0.6,0.7)$        | $[0,0.6)$      |           1            |
|    1     |  $[4.5,5]$  | $[4,4.5)$            | $[3.5,4)$           |  $[3,3.5)$          | $[0,3)$        |           4            |
|    2     |  $[4.5,5]$  | $[4,4.5)$            | $[3.5,4)$           |  $[3,3.5)$          | $[0,3)$        |           5            |
|    3     |  $[4.5,5]$  | $[4,4.5)$            | $[3.5,4)$           |  $[3,3.5)$          | $[0,3)$        |           5            |
|    4     |  $[4.5,5]$  | $[4,4.5)$            | $[3.5,4)$           |  $[3,3.5)$          | $[0,3)$        |           5            |
|    5     |  $[4.5,5]$  | $[4,4.5)$            | $[3.5,4)$           |  $[3,3.5)$          | $[0,3)$        |           5            |

# >>Assignment Rmd Document<<

[Feel free to use the assignment Rmd document instead of creating your own.](/assets/hw/hw3/hw3.Rmd)

# Exercises


## (1 Point) Exercise 0: Hop on the Magic GitHub Bus!

Just as before, we will setup new repository to check our code into. However,
 we're going to slightly change how we make repositories. In this case, I've 
 already created a repository for you! You will need to claim your repository
 within the [`stat385uiuc` organization in GitHub](https://github.com/stat385uiuc).
 Repositories have been assigned under `stat385uiuc/<netid>`.

1. Create a new RStudio Version controlled project called "Homework"
by cloning the repository from `stat385uiuc` following:
https://github.com/stat385uiuc/<netid>
2. Within the project directory, create a **folder** called `hw2` and place the
`hw2_netid.Rmd` file inside.
3. **Please commit every exercise as you complete them.**
4. Provide a link to your GitHub repository to be awarded credit.


## (4 Points) Exercise 1: I vant to *automatically* read your data! 

The goal behind this exercise is to expose you to different ways to read in data
to R. 

- Alas, one of your clients has decided to move all of their consulting work
to your practice! However, their old firm wanted to try and impede their release
by supplying active datasets with formats they new spanned a large collection of
statistical software. 
- Please import the data into R, provide a summary on each
data set to indicate what kind of data is contained,
the number of observations, number of variables, and
an overview of each columns variables.
    - [`ship_data.dta`](/assets/hw/hw3/data/ship_data.dta)
    - [`test_scores.sas7bdat`](/assets/hw/hw3/data/test_scores.sas7bdat)
    - [`child_data.sav`](/assets/hw/hw3/data/child_data.sav)
    - [`GE2011InformationalRates102512_0.XLS`](/assets/hw/hw3/data/GE2011InformationalRates102512_0.XLS)
        - Remove the first row and set the second row as the column names.
- **Save each dataset as a `.rda` file using `save(obj, file="name.rda")`**
    - Take a screenshot of the saved data. 
    
## (5 Points) Exercise 2: I vant to *manually* read your data! 

The objective behind this exercise is to understand that sometimes it might 
be faster or simply easier to directly write the results into R. 

- A biologist sent you an e-mail with the following contigency table relating
HIV status to Test results written in HTML. He asked you to quickly obtain
the **percentage** per each cell. 
     - Please make sure to set the correct row and column names of the matrix!
    
| Disease  | Test +  | Test -  | Total|
|----------|---------|---------|------|
| **HIV+** |  23     |   0     |  23  |
| **HIV-** |  13     |  164    | 177  |
|**Total** |  36     | 164     | 200  |

- One of the national testing programs recently sent over data relating 
how students are scoring on their exams. They are having difficulty reshaping
the data so that each score has its own row. 
    - Make sure to cast `sex` and `race` to be of type `factor`


```bash
 id    sex             race write math science
 30   male            Asian    52   37       3
 20 female African American    59   90      25
 26   male  Native American    33   27      29
 15 female African American    44   20      56
  9   male        Caucasian    52   19      25
 10 female African American    52    5      39
  4   male African American    59   84      83
 12   male        Caucasian    46   27      46
 13 female  Native American    57   52      37
 11 female            Asian    55   33      79
```

## (5 Points) Exercise 3: Captain Planet and the Planeteers!

The tenets of this exercise are meant to briefly expose the notion of 
scrapping information from a website and getting it into a functional analysis
state.

- For the next exercise, the attention is focused on the [list of environment dates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_environmental_dates) given on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org). We would like to know the average amount
of time between fixed earth celebration days.
     - To obtain this data, we can use:


```r
# install.packages("rvest")
library("rvest")

d = read_html("https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_environmental_dates")

d %>% 
  html_node("#mw-content-text > table:nth-child(10)") %>%
  html_table() -> environment_days
```

**Suggested Steps**

- Step 1: Figure out how many environmental days have fixed days. 
     - E.g. Fixed environmental days are given as `mm-dd` in the dates column.
- Step 2: Remove any non-fixed environmental days (e.g. missing `mm-dd` format)
from the `environment_days`.
- Step 3: Extract either the `mm-dd` or `Month dd` and place it into a new column
of the `environment_days` object called `datetime` 
- Step 4: Convert the `datetime` column from the `character` class to `POSIXct`.
- Step 5: Calculate the time difference between rows.
- Step 6: Take an average of the time difference. 

## (5 Points) Exercise 4: Battle of the Regex

The idea behind this exercise is to provide lots of exposure to regex patterns.

- Write a pattern that matches **only** CAPITAL letters.
      - Matches A B C... Z but not a, b, c, ... , z or 0-9.
      - Test strings: `c("toad","flo","FOOD","123","fake92","RA21")`
- Construct a pattern that will match the words either first or second.
      - Matches first or second regardless of **case**.
      - Test strings: `c("first", "second place", "third", "FIRST")`.
      - *Psst*: `ignore.case=TRUE`
- Establish a means to extract hashtag references from embedded text.
      - Matches `#text`
      - Test Strings: `c("no tag", "#statistics", "#stat #rstat", "hi #stat385")`
- Validate an alphanumeric password that must be between 4 and 8 characters long
      - Matches a password with length of 4-8 characters that has only a-z, A-Z, 0-9.
      - Test Strings: `c("flyingFish1", "toadie23","h!toyou!")`


## (5 Points) Exercise 5: Students and the Last Crusade!

The objective behind this exercise is to have you write your own simple linear
regression function. 

The following formulae will be helpful:

\[\begin{aligned}
  { {\hat \beta }_0} &= \bar y - { {\hat \beta }_1}\bar x\\
  { {\hat \beta }_1} &= \frac{ { {S_{xy} } } }{ { {S_{xx} } } }\\
  { {\hat \sigma }^2} &= \frac{ {RSS} }{ {n - 2} }\\
  {R^2} &= 1 - \frac{ {RSS} }{ {TSS} }\\ 
  se\left( { { {\hat \beta }_0} } \right) &= \sqrt {\frac{ { { {\hat \sigma }^2}\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n {x_i^2} } }{ {n\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n {x_i^2}  - { {\left( {\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n { {x_i} } } \right)}^2} } } } \\
  se\left( { { {\hat \beta }_1} } \right) &= \sqrt {\frac{ { { {\hat \sigma }^2}n} }{ {n\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n {x_i^2}  - { {\left( {\sum\limits_{i = 1}^n { {x_i} } } \right)}^2} } } } \\ 
\end{aligned} \]

- Create a `slr(x, ...)` generic function.

- Write `slr.default(x,y, ...)` method that enables the computation of
$\beta_1$, $\beta_2$, and their standard errors.

- Provide support for the R `formula` object by including:


```r
slr.formula = function(formula, data=list(), ...)
{
    m_info = model.frame(formula = formula, data = data)
    x = model.matrix(attr(m_info, "terms"), data = m_info)
    y = model.response(m_info)
    
    return(slr.default(x, y, ...))
}
```

- What is the benefit of enabling a `formula` object compared to the approach
we used in class for the MLR version of this function? 

- Write a `summary()` function that performs inference on the estimates AND 
gives the $R^2$ value. 

- Construct a function that also computes the prediction via `predict.slr()`.


